Updates ADR-145 regarding realm-picking algorithm v2 (#220)
decentraland/adr: content/ADR-145-pick-realm-v2.md

adr: 145
title: Pick Realm Algorithm V2
date: 2022-11-28

> status: Living

Reviewer: We only make ADR living when they are running in production

Author: Got it, moving this back to Draft, thanks!

Author: Done here -> https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/3d60c885159e2dd9a286a48b3865cdfa3fdce0cf

type: RFC
spdx-license: CC0-1.0
slug: /adr/TEMPLATE
authors:
  - agusaldasoro
  - aleortega
---

## Abstract

The purpose of this document is to outline the necessary modifications to improve the realm picking algorithm, both in terms of its functionality and implementation.

With regard to functionality, the algorithm will be updated to incorporate additional variables in the Catalyst selection process through the addition of new rules. As for the implementation, the software will be relocated to the server-side to accommodate multiple client implementations.

## Context, Reach & Prioritization

> The realm-picking algorithm utilizes a predefined set of rules called `variants` to dynamically switch to the optimal approach based on the platform context through configuration files. However, it has been identified that this algorithm lacks certain capabilities to address potential contexts that Decentraland may encounter. To enhance the selection algorithm, the following improvements are intended:

Author: Done here -> [feedback: update Context, Reach & Prioritization section](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/0640cc785771b031824a5a457aa939ad62f0566b)

- Addition of new rules:
  - Overloaded Catalyst: Servers with CPU or memory usage exceeding 90%, or reaching maximum user capacity, will be excluded from selection.
  - Catalyst Version: Nodes with a version lower than the minimum required version (_as specified in the configuration_) will be excluded from selection. This will allow us to set minimum required version for each service running within a Catalyst.

>   - Catalyst Force: Possibility to forcibly select a Catalyst.

Author: Done here -> [feedback: update Context, Reach & Prioritization section](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/0640cc785771b031824a5a457aa939ad62f0566b)

> - Creation of multiple default rule sets (known as _variants_) that can be easily switched to use different techniques for realm picking.

Author: Done here -> [feedback: update Context, Reach & Prioritization section](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/0640cc785771b031824a5a457aa939ad62f0566b) and here [feedback: replace links concept by rules](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/8a31761d537647dc8168a52bbebb6572da603234)

- Relocating the algorithm to the server-side to accommodate multiple client implementations without losing any capabilities.

From now on, the rules will be referred to as `links` and `filters`. Filters will be used to remove nodes that do not meet specific criteria, while links will be used to assign scores to nodes to determine the best one for redirecting users.

> ## Solution Space Exploration

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to me where will be the configuration file live, also who will be in charge of it? is it the client's responsibility? Is it a configuration of the centralized server/lambda/worker?

> ### Algorithm improvement

Author: Added here -> [feedback: list current rules in place](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/f0d0a3836be7d2b4e895f679e8abb9c373376d3b)

The existing implementation of the realm picking algorithm, as outlined in the [Realm Picking Algorithm ADR](https://adr.decentraland.org/adr/ADR-86), allows for extensibility through the addition of new links and filters. In this proposal, two filters and a new link will be introduced:
- **OVERLOADED_CATALYST**: This filter will exclude a Catalyst if its resource usage or user capacity reaches a certain threshold.
- **VERSION_CATALYST**: This filter will exclude a Catalyst if it does not meet the minimum required version as specified.
- **FORCE_CATALYST**: This new link will enable the forcible selection of a Catalyst listed in its configuration.

> Furthermore, four new variants will be added, each containing a set of rules designed to address specific contexts.

Author: Done here -> [feedback: rephrase Algorithm improvement section](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/40bc236e7c9360c24ef6cf046ef6d45676583758)

> ### Server-side

Author: Done here -> [feedback: rename Server-Side title for Allocating the algorithm on it…](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/b94f59fe348bf09b959e5595fdbfaa8db7b3f81b)

> This algorithm will be implemented on the server-side to accommodate various client implementations. While this may require modifying the implementation of the `LARGE_LATENCY` rule to receive necessary information from the client-side, it will enable enhancements such as adding a cache mechanism or event-driven notifications to proactively filter out unhealthy Catalysts, thereby improving the overall performance of the algorithm.

Author: Explained here -> [feedback: explain how LARGE_LATENCY rule will work and replace varian…](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/7a826fc7ae1a92be6f453db0aba3ef24b940ba3b)

Currently this rule filters out the nodes that do not meet a certain threshold regarding latency.

To assess these aspects, we will examine the workload of the current algorithm, which is monitored through Segment events. The chart below presents the workload data for the past 4 months as of the time of writing.

<img src="resources/ADR-145/realm-picking-algorithm-workload.png" alt="drawing" style="width:100%;"/>

_The average workload is 10k realm picks per day._

## Specification

### Overloaded Catalyst

_Description_:

Exposing the available resources of Catalyst Nodes publicly poses a security risk, and thus, their estimation should be conducted within the Catalyst itself (_specifically in the BFF_), rather than in the Kernel.

Consequently, the BFF will utilize the `acceptingUsers` field in the `/about` endpoint to leverage the calculation of this value. The logic on the Kernel side will be straightforward, involving filtering out Catalysts with a value of false for this field.

On the other hand, the BFF will implement a set of rules to determine the value of `acceptingUsers`. The `acceptingUsers` field will be set to false if:

> - The maximum number of users for the server has been reached, with the maximum amount being specified through environment variables.

Reviewer 2: Should we limit the number of users before reaching the maximum? For example allowing a 90% of capacity

Author: IMO this is not needed. The capacity itself is configured through environment variables, so it is not really the hard-cap limited by the catalyst resources (_which would be the 100%_). Having said so, there is no a real 100% but the number we configured which can be 300/400/N, before deploying this update to production the default was 2000.

- The CPU is at 90% or higher
- The memory usage is at 90% or higher

> 

Reviewer 2: The pseudo-code below is no longer valid, as that implementation lives in Kernel. Please remove it

Author: All the pseudo-codes were removed until we have the final implementation in the proposed service. I'll update this ADR to add the pseudocode for each rule once we have each implementation in place to avoid re-work.

Done here -> [feedback: remove pseudo-codes](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/1891f6ba8532b35fc25585c718f749f4f523bff1)

To fulfill the goal of creating a cost-effective, scalable, and globally accessible service, two implementation proposals, CloudFlare Workers and AWS Lambdas, are being considered. The optimal choice for this service will be determined by analyzing various aspects related to cost, pricing model, performance, and latency, which will be discussed in detail in the Server-Side Implementation section.

To assess these aspects, we will examine the workload of the current algorithm, which is monitored through Segment events. The chart below presents the workload data for the past 4 months as of the time of writing.

<img src="resources/ADR-145/realm-picking-algorithm-workload.png" alt="drawing" style="width:100%;"/>

_The average workload is 10k._

## Specification

### Overloaded Catalyst

_Description_:

> Exposing the available resources of Catalyst Nodes publicly poses a security risk, and thus, their estimation should be conducted within the Catalyst itself (_specifically in the BFF_), rather than in the Kernel.

Reviewer 3: Should we still mention BFF here?

Author: Currently this is done in the BFF, may it is worth keeping it like this for now and update the ADR once we completely remove the BFF, what do you think?

Reviewer 2: If the BFF is about to be removed, then we shouldn't mention it here. Anyways, we should specify here who will be responsable for this

Reviewer 4: I won't mention the BFF, we can mention the realm description without specifying who servers, specially since the endpoint is `/about` not `/bff/about`, so bff is just an implementation detail here

Author: Got it, I'm removing this mention about the BFF. Is it enough to mention that these versions are going to be retrieved from each Catalyst?

These predefined sets of rules will be managed by the Foundation, and can be easily switched between based on the current context of the platform.

### Allocating the algorithm on its own server

The algorithm will be implemented as a serverless service, outside of the Catalyst services bundle, to accommodate various client implementations. While this may involve modifying the `LARGE_LATENCY` rule to obtain necessary information from the client-side, it opens up possibilities for enhancements such as implementing cache mechanisms or event-driven notifications to proactively filter out unhealthy Catalysts, leading to improved algorithm performance. For further details on this specific rule implementation, please refer to the section on the Large Latency rule.

To fulfill the goal of creating a cost-effective, scalable and globally accessible service, two implementation proposals, CloudFlare Workers and AWS Lambdas, are being considered. The optimal choice for this service will be determined by analyzing various aspects related to cost, pricing model, performance, and latency, which will be discussed in detail in the Server-Side Implementation section.

> To assess these aspects, we will examine the workload of the current algorithm, which is monitored through Segment events. The chart below presents the workload data for the past 4 months as of the time of writing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To assess these aspects, the workload of the current algorithm will be examined, which is monitored through Segment events. The chart below presents the workload data for the past 4 months as of the time of writing.
```

  })

  return validCandidates
}
```

_Configuration_:

```typescript
export type CatalystVersionConfig = {
  config?: 
          { comms?: string;
            bff?: string;
            content?: string;
            lambdas?: string;
          }
}
```

### Force Catalyst

_Description_:

This rule will have multiple Catalysts, sorted by priority, defined in its configuration. The rule will attempt to connect to the first Catalyst in the list. If it is unavailable, it will continue trying with the subsequent Catalysts specified in the configuration in order of priority.

_Pseudo Code_:

```typescript
export function catalystVersionLink(configuration: ForceCatalystConfig) {
    let picked = context.picked
    
    const candidates = picked.map(candidate => candidate.catalystName)
    const selected = configuration.sortedOptions?.find(candidate => candidates.includes(candidate))
    
    context.selected = !!selected 
        ? picked.find(candidate => candidate.catalystName === selected)
        : undefined

    return context
}
```

_Configuration_:

```typescript
export type ForceCatalystConfig = {
  config?: { sortedOptions?: [string]; }
}
```

### Large Latency

_Description_:

> This rule will still operate as it currently does. However, in order to implement it on the server-side, the client will need to check the latency on all nodes to pass this information to the service. To prevent clients from constantly calling all nodes to check latency, they will first check if the realm-picking service is using a `variant` that contains the `LARGE_LATENCY` filter and only if it does it will gather the latency information to pass it over.

Reviewer 3: Does this mean an extra request to the server?

```typescript
export function fetchCatalystStatus() {

  if (currentChecks && result.acceptingUsers) {
    // ...
  }

  return undefined
}
```

### Catalyst Version

_Description_:

> Every Catalyst node provides information about the versions of its Content, Lambdas, BFF, and Comms components. The Kernel reads these version fields and compares them with the minimum required version specified in the rule configuration. As a result, the configuration has the flexibility to specify minimum required versions for one or more services, allowing the Catalyst to be considered as a candidate only if it meets these requirements. This means that the configuration file can specify minimum required versions for X and Xn services, giving the flexibility to specify versions for one or more services as needed.

Reviewer 2: Same here, it continues referencing to Kernel

_Pseudo Code_:

```typescript
export function catalystVersionLink(configuration: CatalystVersionConfig) {
  const minimumRequiredVersions = configuration

  Object.keys(minimumRequiredVersions).forEach(([serviceName, serviceRequiredVersion]) => {
    validCandidates = picked.filter(candidate => meetsVersion(candidate, serviceName, serviceRequiredVersion))
    // ...
  })

  return validCandidates
}
```

> _Configuration_:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if it's clear where will be this configuration stored and who will be in charge of it

```typescript
export type CatalystVersionConfig = {
  config?: 
          { comms?: string;
            bff?: string;
            content?: string;
            lambdas?: string;
          }
}
```

> ### Force Catalyst

Reviewer 2: The force catalyst will return only one? Does it make sense to return a recommended order instead?

_Description_:

This rule will have multiple Catalysts, sorted by priority, defined in its configuration. The rule will attempt to connect to the first Catalyst in the list. If it is unavailable, it will continue trying with the subsequent Catalysts specified in the configuration in order of priority.

_Pseudo Code_:

```typescript

> export function catalystVersionLink(configuration: ForceCatalystConfig) {

Reviewer: If possible I'd try to use a different analogy than the current algorithm "links" it has proven hard to reason and understand

Author: I'm replacing this link concept for rules.

Author: Done here -> [feedback: replace links concept by rules](https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/220/commits/8a31761d537647dc8168a52bbebb6572da603234)

    let picked = context.picked
    
    const candidates = picked.map(candidate => candidate.catalystName)
    const selected = configuration.sortedOptions?.find(candidate => candidates.includes(candidate))
    
    context.selected = !!selected 
        ? picked.find(candidate => candidate.catalystName === selected)
        : undefined

    return context
}
```

_Configuration_:

```typescript
export type ForceCatalystConfig = {
  config?: { sortedOptions?: [string]; }
}
```

### Large Latency

_Description_:

> This rule will still operate as it currently does. However, in order to implement it on the server-side, the client will need to check the latency on all nodes to pass this information to the service. To prevent clients from constantly calling all nodes to check latency, they will first check if the realm-picking service is using a `variant` that contains the `LARGE_LATENCY` filter and only if it does it will gather the latency information to pass it over.

Reviewer 2: I'd change the responsibility here, instead of the client sending to the server their own latencies for each option, I'd prefer something like the server returning a recommended ordered list of catalysts and then the client will choose from that list according to its local latency.

For example:

```
Client ->  Server  // getListOfCatalyst() -> [catalystB, catalystD, catalystA]
Then the client chooses the first one on the list with an adequate latency
```

> ### Variants

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense for the client to choose the variant that wants to be executed? 
For example: should the lambda receive the configuration as payload/params? And return the best choice of realm according to that?

#### Default

This variant will serve as the default configuration when no specific context needs to be addressed.

> - Filter by OVERLOADED_CATALYST
>   - Firstly, nodes that are struggling to perform as expected will be filtered out.
> - Filter by LARGE_LATENCY
>   - Next, nodes that are located far away from the user in terms of latency will be filtered out.
> - Score by CLOSE_PEERS_SCORE
>   - After filtering, if the user is attempting to connect to a specific scene, they will be redirected to the node with the highest number of peers in that scene.
> - Score by ALL_PEERS_SCORE
>   - If the previous score does not result in the selection of a single catalyst, the node with the highest number of peers connected to it will be chosen.
> - Balance with LOAD_BALANCING
>   - As a fallback, if multiple catalysts are eligible for selection, a Round-Robin strategy will be implemented to evenly distribute the load among them.

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
1. Filter by OVERLOADED_CATALYST
  - Firstly, nodes that are struggling to perform as expected will be filtered out.
2. Filter by LARGE_LATENCY
  - Next, nodes that are located far away from the user in terms of latency will be filtered out.
3. Score by CLOSE_PEERS_SCORE
  - After filtering, if the user is attempting to connect to a specific scene, they will be redirected to the node with the highest number of peers in that scene.
4. Score by ALL_PEERS_SCORE
  - If the previous score does not result in the selection of a single catalyst, the node with the highest number of peers connected to it will be chosen.
5. Balance with LOAD_BALANCING
  - As a fallback, if multiple catalysts are eligible for selection, a Round-Robin strategy will be implemented to evenly distribute the load among them.
```

  - Then, nodes that are struggling to perform as expected will be filtered out.
- Balance with LOAD_BALANCING
  - As a fallback, if multiple catalysts are eligible for selection, a Round-Robin strategy will be implemented to evenly distribute the load among them.

#### Force

This variant will be employed when it is necessary to forcibly direct users to connect to specific realms.
- FORCE_CATALYST
  - This link will be used to attempt selection of a node as specified in its configuration.

#### Crowd

This variant will be useful when we want to crowd the nodes so the users can interact between them more frequently.
- Score by CLOSE_PEERS_SCORE
  - After filtering, if the user is attempting to connect to a specific scene, they will be redirected to the node with the highest number of peers in that scene.
- Score by ALL_PEERS_SCORE
  - If the previous score does not result in the selection of a single catalyst, the node with the highest number of peers connected to it will be chosen.
- Balance with LOAD_BALANCING
  - As a fallback, if multiple catalysts are eligible for selection, a Round-Robin strategy will be implemented to evenly distribute the load among them.

> ### Server-Side Implementation

Reviewer 2: What will happen if the server to choose realm is down? Can the client execute the same logic for itself? What will be the default behavior?

> In this section, we will analyze the options for implementing the algorithm on the server side, considering factors such as global availability, cache capabilities, scalability, and cold-start performance. The two options under consideration are `AWS Lambdas` and `CloudFlare Workers`.

Reviewer 2: How will the cache work? Are workers or lambdas able to do that? Based on what parameters will be the cache function on?
